Add StackSets Lab (#193)
aws-samples/cfn101-workshop: content/intermediate/operations/stacksets/index.md

12. Navigate to **Exports**. You should see new entry with Export name `AWS-CloudFormationWorkshop-SecurityGroupId`.

![StackSetsSecuritygroupexports](/static/intermediate/operations/stacksets/exportssecuritygroup.png)

Congratulations! You have learned how export the output values from one stack set and import this value into another stack set.

### Challenge

In this exercise, you will use the knowledge gained from earlier parts of this lab to deploy a new stack set that would provision an [Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ec2/?id=docs_gateway) instance in the existing VPC and attach the security group you created earlier. Your task is to update the template `example_ec2instance.yaml` to import `SubnetId1` that you exported as part of Part 1 of this lab. You will also choose to deploy in **Parallel**. The architecture diagram highlighting the EC2 instance you will describe as part of this challenge is shown next:

![StackSetsEc2instance](/static/intermediate/operations/stacksets/stacksetsec2instance.png)

:::expand{header="Need a hint?"}

> * Change directory to the `code/workspace/stacksets` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Make sure you are in the directory named `code/workspace/stacksets`.
```

* Open the `example_ec2instance.yaml` CloudFormation template in the text editor of your choice.

> ::alert[Note: [Amazon Machine Image (AMI) IDs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html) are different for instances in different regions. To use region-specific AMI IDs, understand the following code snippet in the Parameters section of your template queries the latest AMI ID for that region and this is also referenced (`LatestAmiId`) in **Parameters** section of your template.]{type="info"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::alert[Note: [Amazon Machine Image (AMI)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html) resources are unique in each region. To use region-specific AMI IDs, you use the following code snippet in the `Parameters` section of your template to query the ID of the latest AMI for a given region; you also reference `LatestAmiId` in the **Resources** section of your template in `ImageId`.]{type="info"}
```

```yaml
  LatestAmiId:
    Description: The ID of the region-specific Amazon Machine Image to use.
    Type: AWS::SSM::Parameter::Value<AWS::EC2::Image::Id>
    Default: /aws/service/ami-amazon-linux-latest/amzn2-ami-hvm-x86_64-gp2
```

> * Edit the Resources section of the template to import the value for SubnetId1 that was exported in Part 1. You can import the parameter of your choice the same way you imported VPC ID from `example_network.yaml` to `example_securitygroup.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Edit the `Resources` section of the template to import the value for `SubnetId1` that you exported in Part 1. You can import the parameter of your choice the same way you imported the ID of the VPC, from `example_network.yaml` to `example_securitygroup.yaml`.
```

:::

:::expand{header="Want to see the solution?"}
* You can find the full solution in the `code/solutions/stacksets/example_ec2instance.yaml` template.

> * To deploy stack sets in parallel, when creating a new stack set, in **Deployment Options**, choose to deploy as **Parallel**. This will deploy StackSets operation in both the regions in **parallel**, thus saving time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the following line to the EC2 instance properties: `      SubnetId: !ImportValue AWS-CloudFormationWorkshop-SubnetId1`.
* Use the updated template, and create a new `example-ec2instance-workshop` stack set to deploy the EC2 instance resources in the 2 regions you chose earlier.  To deploy StackSets operations in parallel, from **Deployment Options** choose **Parallel**. This will deploy StackSets operations in both regions in parallel, thus saving time.
```

:::
### Cleanup

You will now tear down the resources you created. To delete stack set, you will first delete stacks within them and then delete the empty stack set.

**How to delete AWS CloudFormation stacks within stack set**

1. Navigate to the [AWS CloudFormation StackSets console.](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home#/stacksets)

> 2. Select the CloudFormation stack set you want to delete the stacks from. Choose the last stack set you created, i.e. `example_ec2instance` stack set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select the CloudFormation stack set you want to delete the stacks from. Choose the last stack set you created, i.e., `example-ec2instance-workshop`.
```

> 3. From top right section of the page, select **Actions** and choose **Delete stacks from StackSet**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. From top-right section of the page, select **Actions**, and choose **Delete stacks from StackSet**.
```

4. Under **Accounts**, select **Deploy stacks in accounts** under **Deployment locations**.

> 5. Under **Account numbers** enter the 12-digit AWS account ID for the account you are using for this lab. You can find this by selecting the user/role drop down you have logged into the account with on the top right corner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Under **Account numbers** enter the 12-digit AWS account ID for the account you are using for this lab.
```

6. For **Specify regions** select **Add all regions**. This will automatically select the AWS Regions that the StackSet deployed stacks into. Choose **Next**.
7. The **Status** changes to `PENDING`.
8. Refresh until the **Status** changes to `SUCCEEDED`.

> 9. Follow steps 2 through 8 for the other two stack sets (i.e. example_securitygroup and example_network).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Follow steps 2 through 8 for the other two stack sets, and in the following order: `example-securitygroup-workshop`, and `example-network-workshop`.
```

Now that you have deleted stacks within each StackSet, you will now choose to delete the empty StackSet.

**How to delete an AWS CloudFormation stack set**

1. Navigate to [AWS CloudFormation StackSets console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home#/stacksets).
2. Select the stack set you wish to delete.
3. Choose **Actions** and then **Delete StackSet**.
4. Under **Accounts**, select **Deploy stacks in accounts** under **Deployment locations**.
5. In the popup that appears, confirm you want to delete this stack set by choosing **Delete StackSet**.
6. On refresh, your StackSet should no longer be listed.
7. Follow steps 2 through 6 for other two stack sets.

### Conclusion

> Great work! You learned how you can use CloudFormation StackSets to deploy templates in multiple AWS Regions using a single operation, and how to export output parameters from one stack set and import them into the another stack set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great work! You learned how you can use CloudFormation StackSets to deploy templates in multiple AWS Regions using a single operation, and how to export output parameters from one stack set instance and import them into another stack set instance.
```

---
title: "Orchestrating with StackSets"
weight: 700
---

_Lab Duration: ~45 minutes_

---

### Overview

> You can deploy the same infrastructure in multiple AWS [Regions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/Concepts.RegionsAndAvailabilityZones.html) and/or multiple AWS accounts using [AWS CloudFormation StackSets](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/what-is-cfnstacksets.html). With CloudFormation StackSets, you can create, update, or delete stacks across multiple accounts and AWS regions with a single operation. From an administrator account, you can define and manage a CloudFormation template, and use the template as a basis for provisioning stacks into target accounts or regions of your choice. You can also share parameters between stack sets by [exporting and importing output values](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-importvalue.html), and establish dependencies in your stack sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can deploy the same infrastructure in multiple AWS [Regions](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/regions_az/) and/or multiple AWS accounts using [AWS CloudFormation StackSets](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/what-is-cfnstacksets.html). With CloudFormation StackSets, you can create, update, or delete stacks across multiple accounts and AWS regions with a single operation. From an administrator account, you can define and manage a CloudFormation template, and use the template as a basis for provisioning stacks into target accounts or regions of your choice. You can also share parameters between stack sets by [exporting and importing output values](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-importvalue.html), and establish dependencies in your stack sets.
```

1. Change directory to the `code/workspace/stacksets` directory.
2. Open the `example_network.yaml` CloudFormation template in the text editor of your choice.
3. Familiarize with the configuration for the example resources in the template. In the example, your intents are to:
    1. create an [Amazon Virtual Private Cloud](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/?id=docs_gateway), Internet Gateway, two public subnets, route table, and two routes to the Internet: you will choose to deploy these resources in multiple regions using a single create operation via CloudFormation StackSets;

    2. [export](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/using-cfn-stack-exports.html) the VPC ID and Subnet IDs outputs. Exports are region-specific.

You will use the `example_network.yaml` template, that contains the network resources mentioned earlier, to deploy the template in two regions (`us-east-1` and `us-west-2`) of the same account.

In this next step, you will use the AWS CloudFormation Console to create a stack set from the `example_network.yaml` template:

1. Navigate to the [AWS CloudFormation Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/).

> 2. From the left hand panel, select the **StackSets** tab. Choose **Create StackSets**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. From the panel on the left of the page, select the **StackSets** tab. Choose **Create StackSets**.
```

3. In the **Permissions** section: leave the value for **IAM Admin role ARN** empty; set **IAM execution role name** to **AWSCloudFormationStackSetsExecutionRole**.
5. From the **Prerequisite**-**Prepare template** section, choose **Template is ready**.
6. Under **Specify template**, select **Template source** and choose **Upload a template file**. Select **Choose file** and supply the CloudFormation template `example_network.yaml` mentioned earlier, and then choose **Next**.

> 7. In **Specify StackSet details** page, provide name, description and set parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. In **Specify StackSet details** page, provide name, description, and set parameters:
```

    1. Specify a **StackSet** name. For example, choose `example-network-workshop`.

>     2. Provide a **StackSet description**. For example, choose `Provisions VPC, internet gateway, two public subnets, and two routes`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Provide a **StackSet description**. For example, choose `Provisions VPC, internet gateway, two public subnets, and two routes to the Internet`.
```

>     3. For **Parameters**, keep them as is. Choose **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Accept default values for **Parameters**. Choose **Next**.
```

8. On **Configure StackSet options**, leave **Execution configuration** as is. Choose **Next**.

> 9. In **Set deployment options** page, in **Add stacks to stack set** section, choose to **Deploy new stacks**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. In **Set deployment options** page, in **Add stacks to stack set** section, choose to **Deploy new stacks**.
```

![StackSetExports](/static/intermediate/operations/stacksets/exports.png)

Congratulations! You have deployed your infrastructure to multiple AWS Regions using a single operation.

**Part 2**

In this part of the lab, you will use a new CloudFormation template, `example_securitygroup.yaml`, describing a security group that you will associate to the VPC you created earlier in a given region. You will also export the output for the **Security Group ID**, so that you can consume it later in the *Challenge* portion of this workshop lab. The architecture diagram highlighting the security group resource you will describe with the `example_securitygroup.yaml` template is shown next:

![StackSetsSecuritygroup](/static/intermediate/operations/stacksets/stacksetsecuritygroup.png)

Let’s get started:

1. Make sure you are in the following directory: `code/workspace/stacksets`.
2. Open the `example_securitygroup.yaml` template in your favorite text editor.
3. Familiarize with the configuration for the example security group in the template. In the example, your intents are to:

>     1. create a security group: you will choose to deploy your security group in the same VPC you created earlier and in multiple regions using a single create operation using CloudFormation StackSets. You will reference the VPC ID using the `Fn::ImportValue` [intrinsic function](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-importvalue.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. create a security group for the VPC you created earlier in each of the two regions with a single create operation using CloudFormation StackSets. You will reference the VPC ID using the `Fn::ImportValue` [intrinsic function](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-importvalue.html);
```

    2. export the `SecurityGroupId` output. Exports are region-specific.

In this next step, you will use the AWS CloudFormation console to create a stack set from the `example_securitygroup.yaml` template:

1. Navigate to the [AWS CloudFormation Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/).

> 2. From the left hand panel, select the **StackSets** tab. Choose **Create StackSets.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select the **StackSets** tab. Choose **Create StackSets**.
```

3. In the **Permissions** section: for **IAM Admin role ARN**, select **IAM role name** from the drop-down menu, and set it to **AWSCloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole**; set **IAM execution role name** to **AWSCloudFormationStackSetsExecutionRole**.
4. From **Prepare template**, choose **Template is ready**.
5. For **Template source**, choose **Upload a template file**. Select **Choose file** and supply the CloudFormation template `example_securitygroup.yaml` mentioned earlier, and then choose **Next**.

> 6. In **Specify StackSet details** page, provide name, description and set parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. In **Specify StackSet details** page, provide name, description, and set parameters:
```

    1. Specify a **StackSet name**. For example, choose `example-securitygroup-workshop`.
    2. Provide a **StackSet description**. For example, choose `Provisions a security group, and associates it to the existing VPC`.

>     3. For **Parameters**, keep them as is. Choose **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Accept default values for **Parameters**. Choose **Next**.
```

* Open the `example_ec2instance.yaml` CloudFormation template in the text editor of your choice.

::alert[Note: [Amazon Machine Image (AMI)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html) resources are unique in each region. To use region-specific AMI IDs, you use the following code snippet in the `Parameters` section of your template to query the ID of the latest AMI for a given region; you also reference `LatestAmiId` in the **Resources** section of your template in `ImageId`.]{type="info"}

```yaml
  LatestAmiId:
    Description: The ID of the region-specific Amazon Machine Image to use.
    Type: AWS::SSM::Parameter::Value<AWS::EC2::Image::Id>
    Default: /aws/service/ami-amazon-linux-latest/amzn2-ami-hvm-x86_64-gp2
```
* Edit the `Resources` section of the template to import the value for `SubnetId1` that you exported in Part 1. You can import the parameter of your choice the same way you imported the ID of the VPC, from `example_network.yaml` to `example_securitygroup.yaml`.
:::

:::expand{header="Want to see the solution?"}
* You can find the full solution in the `code/solutions/stacksets/example_ec2instance.yaml` template.

> * Add the following line to the EC2 instance properties: `      SubnetId: !ImportValue AWS-CloudFormationWorkshop-SubnetId1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Append the following to the EC2 instance properties: `SubnetId: !ImportValue AWS-CloudFormationWorkshop-SubnetId1`.
```

2. Select the CloudFormation stack set you want to delete the stacks from. Choose the last stack set you created, i.e., `example-ec2instance-workshop`.
3. From top-right section of the page, select **Actions**, and choose **Delete stacks from StackSet**.
4. Under **Accounts**, select **Deploy stacks in accounts** under **Deployment locations**.
5. Under **Account numbers** enter the 12-digit AWS account ID for the account you are using for this lab.
6. For **Specify regions** select **Add all regions**. This will automatically select the AWS Regions that the StackSet deployed stacks into. Choose **Next**.
7. The **Status** changes to `PENDING`.
8. Refresh until the **Status** changes to `SUCCEEDED`.
9. Follow steps 2 through 8 for the other two stack sets, and in the following order: `example-securitygroup-workshop`, and `example-network-workshop`.

Now that you have deleted stacks within each StackSet, you will now choose to delete the empty StackSet.

**How to delete an AWS CloudFormation stack set**

1. Navigate to [AWS CloudFormation StackSets console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home#/stacksets).
2. Select the stack set you wish to delete.

> 3. Choose **Actions** and then **Delete StackSet**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Choose **Actions**, and then **Delete StackSet**.
```

4. Under **Accounts**, select **Deploy stacks in accounts** under **Deployment locations**.
5. In the popup that appears, confirm you want to delete this stack set by choosing **Delete StackSet**.
6. On refresh, your StackSet should no longer be listed.

> 7. Follow steps 2 through 6 for other two stack sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Follow steps 2 through 6 for the two other stack sets.
```
